#Learn Python and help develop Wrye Bash.
Wrye is the Monkey GOD of Modding!
Never be afraid to sit awhile and think.
It is much simpler to buy books than to read them and easier to read them than to absorb their contents.
Establishing goals is all right if you don't let them deprive you of interesting detours.
Creativity comes from trust. Trust your instincts. And Metallicow.
There's no use talking about the problem unless you talk about the solution. Seen that wxPython: stdout/stderr window that pops up sometimes. Chances are it contains traceback information about a bug that you should report to the developers official thread.
When you do the common things in life in an uncommon way, you will command the attention of the world. Or at least a bunch of mod users...
Everyone has to learn to think differently, bigger, to open to possibilities. And to MEGA-MOD.
There are over 400 books in Vanilla Oblivion.
BAIN is short for BAsh INstallers.
WizBAIN is short for Wizard BAsh INstaller. It is a alphabet soup acrynim for a Mod package that includes a install script. Right clicking on the package and selecting the menu option 'Wizard' will begin the install script. WizBAIN packages/projects have a wizard wand overlay on the icon.
TES V:Skyrim was released on 11.11.11.
"M'aiq wishes he had a stick made out of fishies to give to you. Sadly, he does not."
Cheese for everyone!
Middle Clicky in the Comments / WizBAIN Editor window will open a popup menu with .txt and .py macros you can use. If you find yourself using the same piece of code over again and again, save time by saving it as a text(snippet) macro. If you have a more involved function you would like to perform and know a bit of Python, save time by writing a py macro. These are located in their respectively named Mopy/macro/ext directories.
Sometimes you might find that Wrye Bash doesn't want to start for some odd reason. Check the Mopy directory for a file named 'pidfile.tmp'. Delete that file. Sometimes this might require a process Unlocker application.
The concept of open source and the free sharing of technological information existed long before computers. For example, cooking recipes have been shared since the beginning of human culture. Open source can pertain to businesses and to computers, software and technology.                -Some Wikipedia Author @ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_source
Developers Note #1: Closing or retarting bash while a non-modal wx.dialog is open most often causes the pidfile.tmp to lock.
If you have a bunch of projects(directories in the bash installers directory), unchecking Auto-Refresh Projects saves a good amount of time when loading. Note this saves time when working on or combining multiple projects. The projects can then be Refreshed(right click on project-select Refresh) manually when you are ready. Note also that if you are only working on a writing/saving a wizard script, the project doesn't need Refreshed every time before you test run your wizard.  